traiguṇyādbhinnarūpaṃ bhavati hi bhuvane hīnamadhyottamaṃ yat
jñānaṃ śraddhā ca kartā vasatirapi sukhaṃ karma cāhārabhedā: |
tvatkṣetratvanniṣevādi tu yadiha punastvatparaṃ tattu sarvaṃ
prāhurnaiguṇyaniṣṭhaṃ tadanubhajanato maṅkṣu siddho bhaveyam ||1||
traiguṇyāt-bhinna-rūpaṃ	because of the three gunas, different kinds
bhavati hi bhuvane	are indeed there, in this world
hīna-madhya-uttamaṃ yat	low, middle and high, that
jñānaṃ śraddhā ca kartā	knowledge, faith and doer
vasati:-api sukhaṃ	residence and happiness
karma ca-āhāra-bhedā:	work and food various
tvat-kṣetra-tvat-niṣevā-	Thy temple, Thy worship
ādi tu yat-iha	etc., indeed whatever there is
puna:-tvat-paraṃ	again pertaining to Thee
tat-tu sarvaṃ	all that indeed
prāhu:-naiguṇya-niṣṭhaṃ	is said to be beyond three gunas
tat-anubhajanata:	that resorting to
maṅkṣu siddha:-bhaveyam	soon I will become perfect
All entities in this world, knowledge, faith, work, residence, happiness, food etc., being constituted of the three gunas, are of different kinds and different gradations, such as, low, mediocre or high. But entities and activities pertaining to Thee, Thy temples and Thy worship are beyond these three gunas. By resorting to these, I will soon become perfect (free).
tvayyeva nyastacitta: sukhamayi vicaran sarvaceṣṭāstvadarthaṃ
tvadbhaktai: sevyamānānapi caritacarānāśrayan puṇyadeśān |
dasyau vipre mṛgādiṣvapi ca samamatirmucyamānāvamāna-
spardhāsūyādidoṣa: satatamakhilabhūteṣu saṃpūjaye tvām ||2||
tvayi-eva nyasta-citta:	in Thee alone (with) fixed mind
sukham-ayi vicaran	happily, O Thou! Living
sarva-ceṣṭā:-tvat-arthaṃ	all actions to Thee dedicated
tvat-bhaktai: sevyamānān-api	by Thy devotees resorted to (now)
carita-carān-āśrayan	or which were resorted to, going to
puṇya-deśān	(those) holy places
dasyau vipre	in a robber and Braahmin
mṛgādiṣu-api ca samamati:-	in animals also equal minded
mucyamāna-avamāna-	shedding dishonour and honour
spardhā-asūyā-ādi-doṣa:	enmity and jealousy etc., defects
satatam-akhila-bhūteṣu	always, in all beings
saṃpūjaye tvām	will worship Thee
O Lord! With my mind fixed in Thee, I will live happily dedicating all my actions to Thee. I will go to the holy places, where Thy devotees go, or where they went in the past. I will maintain an equal minded behaviour towards a robber or a Braahmin and also towards animals. Shedding the defective mental attitude of dishonour, honour, enmity, jealousy etc., I will worship Thee in all beings.
tvadbhāvo yāvadeṣu sphurati na viśadaṃ tāvadevaṃ hyupāstiṃ
kurvannaikātmyabodhe jhaṭiti vikasati tvanmayo'haṃ careyam |
tvaddharmasyāsya tāvat kimapi na bhagavan prastutasya praṇāśa-
stasmātsarvātmanaiva pradiśa mama vibho bhaktimārgaṃ manojñam ||3||
tvat-bhāva: yāvat-	Thy-ness, until
eṣu sphurati na viśadaṃ	in all these, does no manifest clearly
tāvat-evaṃ hi-upāstiṃ	till then in this way only worship
kurvan-aikātmya-bodhe	doing, oneness (in everything) knowledge
jhaṭiti vikasati	suddenly dawns
tvat-maya:-ahaṃ careyam	with Thee identified I will move about
tvat-dharmasya-asya	Thy (Bhaagavat) Dharma, this
tāvat-kim-api na	till then, in the least also, will not
bhagavan	O Lord!
prastutasya praṇāśa:-	having being started, lost
tasmāt-sarva-ātmanā-eva	therefore, in its all totality alone
pradiśa mama vibho	give to me O Lord!
bhakti-mārgaṃ manojñam	the captivating path of devotion
In all the entities, until oneness with Thee does not clearly manifest, I will continue to worship in this way only. By which when the knowledge of oneness suddenly dawns, I will move about with total identification with Thee. O Lord! Once the practice of Bhaagvata Dharma is begun, it can not be totally lost. Therefore. O Lord! set me on the captivating path of devotion.
taṃ cainaṃ bhaktiyogaṃ draḍhayitumayi me sādhyamārogyamāyu-
rdiṣṭyā tatrāpi sevyaṃ tava caraṇamaho bheṣajāyeva dugdham |
mārkaṇḍeyo hi pūrvaṃ gaṇakanigaditadvādaśābdāyuruccai:
sevitvā vatsaraṃ tvāṃ tava bhaṭanivahairdrāvayāmāsa mṛtyum ||4||
taṃ ca-enaṃ bhakti-yogaṃ	and that this Bhakti Yoga
draḍhayitum-ayi	to be firmly established, O Thou!
me sādhyam-	by me is to be pursued
ārogyam-āyu:-	good health and long life
diṣṭyā tatra-api	fortunately, there also
sevyaṃ tava caraṇam-	service to Thy feet (alone is to be done)
aho bheṣajāya-eva dugdham	wonderful! For medicine alone is milk
mārkaṇḍeya: hi pūrvaṃ	Maarkandeya indeed, long ago
gaṇaka-nigadita-	by the astrologer being told
dvādaśa-ābda-āyu:-	twelve years of age
uccai: sevitvā vatsaraṃ	intensely serving for one year
tvāṃ tava bhaṭa-nivahai:-	Thee, by Thy emissaries
drāvayāmāsa mṛtyum	drove away was death
O Lord! In order to get firmly established in Bhakti Yoga, I need good health and long life. Fortunately, to achieve this also, service at Thy feet is to be done. Wonderful it is that the medicine is milk only. Long ago, Maarkandeya was told by an astrologer that his life span was of twelve years only. He worshipped intensely at Thy feet for one year and when death approached, it was driven away by Thy emissaries.
mārkaṇḍeyaścirāyu: sa khalu punarapi tvatpara: puṣpabhadrā-
tīre ninye tapasyannatulasukharati: ṣaṭ tu manvantarāṇi |
devendra: saptamastaṃ surayuvatimarunmanmathairmohayiṣyan
yogoṣmapluṣyamāṇairna tu punaraśakattvajjanaṃ nirjayet ka: ||5||
mārkaṇḍeya:-cira-āyu:	Maarkandeya, ever living
sa khalu puna:-api tvat-para:	he indeed again also towards Thee inclined
puṣpabhadrā-tīre tapasyan-	on the banks of Pushpabhadraa (river) meditating
atula-sukha-rati:	incomparable bliss enjoying
ṣaṭ tu manvantarāṇi	six indeed Manvantaras
devendra: saptama:-taṃ	in the seventh (Manvantra), him (the Indra)
surayuvati-marut-manmathai:-	with the help of celestial damsels, soft breeze and cupid
mohayiṣyan	trying to seduce (Maarkandeya)
yoga-uṣma-pluṣyamāṇai:	by the heat (generated by) the yoga, scorched, (by it)
na tu puna:-aśakat-	not indeed again succeed
tvat-janaṃ nirjayet ka:	Thy devotees who can overcome
Always inclined towards worshipping Thee, Maarkandeya was thus endowed with a blessing of living for ever. He continued to do penance on the banks of Pushpabhadraa river and revelled in incomparable bliss for six manvantras. In the seventh Manvantra, the Indra there, tried to seduce him with the help of celestial damsels, soft breeze and Cupid the god of love.They did not succeed, rather they were scorched by the heat generated by the sage's yoga. Who can overcome Thy devotee?
prītyā nārāyaṇākhyastvamatha narasakha: prāptavānasya pārśvaṃ
tuṣṭyā toṣṭūyamāna: sa tu vividhavarairlobhito nānumene |
draṣṭuṃ māẏāṃ tvadīyāṃ kila punaravṛṇodbhaktitṛptāntarātmā
māyādu:khānabhijñastadapi mṛgayate nūnamāścaryaheto: ||6||
prītyā nārāyaṇa-ākhya:-	being pleased, called Naaraayana
tvam-atha narasakha:	Thou then with Nara as friend
prāptavān-asya pārśvaṃ	reached to his nearness
tuṣṭyā toṣṭūyamāna:	highly joyous, (he sang) Thy praises
sa tu vividhavarai:-	he also by various boons
lobhita: na anumene	(being) tempted, did not care for them
draṣṭuṃ māyāṃ tvadīyaṃ kila	to see Maayaa of Thee, indeed
puna:-avṛṇot-	again, asked for
bhakti-tṛpta-antarātmā	with devotion alone was satisfied his innermost self
māyā-du:kha-anabhijña:-	(caused by) Maayaa, sorrow not knowing
tadapi mṛgayate	that also seeks
nūnam-āścarya-heto:	indeed out of curiosity
Thou as sage Naaraayana, along with Thy friend Nara went near Maarkandeya, and were repeatedly praised by him with great joy. Thou offered to him various boons, but he did not care for them, being satisfied to his innermost self with devotion to Thee. Then he asked to see Thy Maayaa. Being ignorant of the sorrows caused by Maayaa, he chose this boon out of sheer curiosity.
yāte tvayyāśu vātākulajaladagalattoyapūrṇātighūrṇat-
saptārṇorāśimagne jagati sa tu jale sambhraman varṣakoṭī: |
dīna: praikṣiṣṭa dūre vaṭadalaśayanaṃ kañcidāścaryabālaṃ
tvāmeva śyāmalāṅgaṃ vadanasarasijanyastapādāṅgulīkam ||7||
yāte tvayi-āśu	as Thou left, soon
vāta-ākula-	the winds were highly disturbed
jalada-galat-	(by them) the clouds broke loose
toya-pūrṇa-ati-ghūrṇat-	full of water and full of turmoil
sapta-arṇo-rāśi-magne	the seven seas, in it submerged
jagati sa tu jale	the whole world, he too in the waters
sambhraman varṣa-koṭī:	wandered for millions of years
dīna: praikṣiṣṭa dūre	exhausted, he saw far away
vaṭa-dala-śayanaṃ	on a banyan leaf lying
kañcit-āścarya-bālaṃ	some indescribable child
tvām-eva śyāmala-aṅgaṃ	Thee alone of blue complexion body
vadana-sarasija-nyasta-	in the lotus mouth placed
pād-aṅgulīkam	the foot toe
As soon as Thou left, the clouds were tossed about by unruly winds and torrential rain waters made the waters of the seven seas overflow, submerging the whole world. Maarkandeya wandered in these waters for millions of years. Exhausted, he saw far away, a wondrous Infant, Thee alone, with the body with a blue hue, lying on a banyan leaf, with the toe placed in the lotus mouth.
dṛṣṭvā tvāṃ hṛṣṭaromā tvaritamupagata: spraṣṭukāmo munīndra:
śvāsenāntarniviṣṭa: punariha sakalaṃ dṛṣṭavān viṣṭapaugham |
bhūyo'pi śvāsavātairbahiranupatito vīkṣitastvatkaṭākṣai-
rmodādāśleṣṭukāmastvayi pihitatanau svāśrame prāgvadāsīt ||8||
dṛṣṭvā tvām	seeing Thee
hṛṣṭa-romā	full of horripilation
tvaritam-upagata:	hastily reaching
spraṣṭu-kāma: munīndra:	to touch,wanting, the sage
śvāsena-anta:-niviṣṭa:	by breath was inside drawn
puna:-iha	again in Thee
sakalaṃ viṣṭapa-aughaṃ	the whole world expanse saw
bhūya:-api śvāsa-vātai:-	again also by the breath wind
bahi:-anupatita:	outside thrown
vīkṣita:-tvat-kaṭākṣai:-	looked at, by Thy sidelong glances
modāt-āśleṣṭukāma:-	in great joy wanting to embrace
tvayi pihita-tanau	when Thy form vanished
sva-āśrame prāk-vat-āsīt	in his aashram, like before he was
Maarkandeya's body was full of horripilation and he rushed to touch Thee. He was drawn into Thee by Thy breath. There he saw the expanse of the whole world. Then thrown out by the breath, he was looked at by Thy sidelong glances. In great joy he approached Thee wanting to embrace Thee. Just then, Thy form disappeared and he found himself in his aashram as before.
gauryā sārdhaṃ tadagre purabhidatha gatastvatpriyaprekṣaṇārthī
siddhānevāsya datvā svayamayamajarāmṛtyutādīn gato'bhūt |
evaṃ tvatsevayaiva smararipurapi sa prīyate yena tasmā-
nmūrtitrayyātmakastvaṃ nanu sakalaniyanteti suvyaktamāsīt ||9||
gauryā sārdhaṃ	with Gauri
tat-agre purabhit-atha	in front of him Shiva then
gata:-tvat-priya-prekṣaṇa-arthī	went, Thy devotee to see wanting
siddhān-eva-asya	acquired already by him (Maarkandeya)
datvā svayam-ayam-	giving, of his own, he
ajarā-mṛtyutā-ādīn	freedom from old age and death etc.,
gata:-abhūt	went away
evaṃ tvat-sevayā-eva	thus by Thy service alone
smararipu:-api	Shiva also
sa prīyate	he is pleased
yena tasmāt-	by which, from that
mūrti-trayi-ātmaka:-	the Trinity's own self
tvaṃ nanu sakala-niyantā-	Thou alone (are) all controlling
iti suvyaktam-āsīt	thus very clearly became
Lord Shiva, along with Gauri went to Maarkandeya, desirous of seeing Thy devotee. He gave the boons of freedom from old age and death etc., without being asked for, which the sage had also acquired by his penance. In this manner, Lord Shiva was also pleased by the worship of Thee alone. This also clearly shows that Thou are Trinity itself Brahmaa Vishnu and Shiva , and also the inner controller of all.
tryaṃśesmin satyaloke vidhiharipurabhinmandirāṇyūrdhvamūrdhvaṃ
tebho'pyūrdhvaṃ tu māyāvikṛtivirahito bhāti vaikuṇṭhaloka: |
tatra tvaṃ kāraṇāmbhasyapi paśupakule śuddhasattvaikarūpī
saccitbrahmādvayātmā pavanapurapate pāhi māṃ sarvarogāt ||10||
tryaṃśe-asmin satyaloke	in three parts in this Satyaloka
vidhi-hara-purabhit-	Brahamaa Vishnu and Shiva
mandirāṇi-ūrdhvam-ūrdhvaṃ	abodes one above the other
tebhya:-api-ūrdhvaṃ tu	of them above also
māyā-vikṛti-virahita:	bereft of Maayaa and Prakriti
bhāti vaikuṇṭhaloka:	shines the realm of Vaikuntha
tatra tvaṃ kāraṇa-ambhasi-	there Thou in Causal waters
api paśupakule	also in the cowherd's house
śuddha-sattvaika-rūpī	pure Saatvic in form
sat-cit-brahma-	Sat-Chit-Brahma
advaya-ātmā	non-dual self
pavanapurapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur
pāhi māṃ sarva-rogāt	save me from all diseases
In the Satyaloka, in three parts, placed one above the other are located the abodes of Brahmaa Vishnu and Shiva. Above all these is the realm of Vaikuntha which is free from the effects of Maayaa and Prakriti, there, in the Causal Waters as also in the house of cowherds, Thou do shine in a pure Sattvic form as Sat Chit Brahma the non dual self. O Lord of Guruvaayur! do save me from all diseases.